Error in the estimation of measures of effect consists of two components: 
random error and systematic error. The scientific analysis of data has 
historically been dominated by the quantification of random error, most often
with hypothesis testing, p values, and confidence intervals of the 
frequentist statistical tradition. Systematic error is largely ignored, or at
most addressed qualitatively. While methods to quantitate systematic error
have been published, implementation of these methods generally require 
tailoring custom programming to individual analyses. Consequently, systematic
error quantification has been largely inaccessible to the scientific community.

Recently, methods to automate systematic error quantification have been
developed. In a 2005 paper, Fox and colleagues describe an approach termed 
"probabilistic bias analysis" that quantifies systematic error from 
misclassification bias, selection bias, and bias from unmeasured confounding.
(Int J Epidemiol. 2005 Dec;34(6):1370-6) The authors implement the methods
using Excel spreadsheets and SAS code. Orsini adapted their code in the STATA
package EPISENS.
(http://nicolaorsini.altervista.org/stata/tutorial/e/episens.htm) Gustafson has
provided R code for quantitative bias analysis in various of his publications
(http://www.stat.ubc.ca/~gustaf/pubs.html), but a unified package does not
exist.

Briefly, probabilistic bias analysis allows for the specification of
probability distributions that approximate an expected bias. An estimate of the
bias is randomly sampled from the distribution and used to calculate an
adjusted effect estimate. The process is repeated in a Monte Carlo fashion, and
the bias-adjusted effect estimates are summarized with the median effect 
estimate and a simulation interval (similar to the confidence interval). For 
example, in a hypothetical study, investigators estimate the association
between smoking and colorectal cancer. Smoking was self-reported by the study 
subjects, and previous literature suggests that subjects misreport their 
smoking status with a sensitivity and specificity between 85% and 95%. With
probabilistic bias analysis, sensitivity and specificity of smoking 
misclassification can be approximated with a triangular probability
distribution, with a minimum of 0.85, a mode of 0.90, and a maximum of 0.95. 

The purpose of the Probabilistic Bias Analysis package is to implement and
extend the probabilistic bias analysis methodologies of Fox and colleagues
in a convenient R package to facilitate the quantification of systematic error
by scientists. The package will initially be limited to the quantification of
error due to misclassification bias, selection bias, and unmeasured confounding
by binary variables. Later, the package will be extended to allow for adjustment
of categorical and continuous variables. The package aims to allow users to
conveniently perform a probability bias analysis on any lm or glm object. 

The project will use the resources of R-Forge to host the package's code while 
under development. R-Forge will facilitate development of the code and allow 
exposure of the package to other users interested in the development or use of 
systematic bias quantification.